Add documentation on how to create a collection (#86)
OpenTermsArchive/docs: content/create-new-collection.en.md

---
title: "Creating a collection"
weight: 2
---

# Creating a collection

## Define the necessary metadata

First of all, define the scope and metadata of the collection:
- Concise description of the collection topic (examples: `Largest global social media`, `Most used social media in France`, `Dating apps`, `Platforms providing services to businesses`…)
- Collection name (3 words maximum, examples: `Platform Governance Archive`, `France Élections`, `Dating`, `P2B Compliance Assessment`…)
- Collection ID (examples: `pga`, `France-elections`, `dating`, `p2b-compliance`…)
- Terms language (examples: `English`, `French`, `All EU languages`…)
- Terms jurisdiction (examples: `EU`, `France`, `EEA`, `USA`, `global`…)
- Collection maintainer entity (name, logo, url)

## Create repositories

### Declarations

Create the collection declarations repository by using the [`demo-declarations`](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-declarations) repository as template:
- Go to the [`demo-declarations` repository](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-declarations)
- Click on the “Use this template” dropdown and select “Create a new repository”

> - In the new “Create a new repository” page that opens up,  fill the field “Repository name” by using the collection ID followed by `-declarations`. For example: `pga-declarations`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Set the repository name to `<collection_id>-declarations`. For example: `pga-declarations`.
```

- When redirected to the newly generated repository, wait a minute or two for the automatic setup to run. You can check the status of the `first-time-setup` GitHub action to make sure that everything ran fine.

#### Fill the about section

- Click on the little cogwheel icon next to the “About” block.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: "Creating a collection"
weight: 2
---

# Creating a collection

## Define the necessary metadata

First of all, it is strongly recommended to define the scope and metadata of the collection:
- Concise description of the collection topic (examples: `Largest global social media`, `Most used social media in France`, `Dating apps`, `Platforms providing services to businesses`…)
- Collection name (3 words maximum, examples: `Platform Governance Archive`, `France Élections`, `Dating`, `P2B Compliance Assessment`…)
- Collection ID (examples: `pga`, `France-elections`, `dating`, `p2b-compliance`…)
- Terms language (examples: `English`, `French`, `English`, `All EU languages`…)
- Service jurisdiction (examples: `EU`, `France`, `EEA`, `EU`…)
- Collection maintainer entity (name, logo, url)

## Create repositories

### Collection definition

> Create the collection definition repository by using the [Demo collection](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-declarations) as template:

Reviewer: At this stage, we are still using the term “declarations” throughout the documentation, I believe it is better to be consistent and make a mass change when / if we decide to replace “declarations” by “definitions”.
```suggestion
Create the collection declarations repository by using the [`demo-declarations`](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-declarations) repository as template:
```

> - Go to the [demo collection repository homepage](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-declarations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Go to the [`demo-declarations` repository](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-declarations)
```

> - Click on the "Use this template" dropdown
> - Select "Create a new repository"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Click on the "Use this template" dropdown and select "Create a new repository"
```

Reviewer 2: Should we add an image for that?

> - In the opened page, fill the repository name, it is strongly recommended to use the collection ID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In the new "Create a new repository" page that opens up,  fill the field `Repository name` by using the collection `ID` followed by `-declarations`. For example: `demo-declarations`
```

> - When redirected to the newly generated repositroy, please wait until the automatic setup is done (it should be done in less than a minute).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When redirected to the newly generated repository, please wait until the automatic setup is done (it should be done in less than a minute). You can check the status of the `first-time-setup` GitHub action to find out if everything went smoothly.
```

> #### Fill the about section

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Fill the about section

- Click on the little cogwheel icon next to the "About" block.
```

> - Set the description: “Declarations for `<collection_name>`. Maintained by `<maintainer>`.”

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fill the description: “Definitions for `<collection_name>`. Maintained by `<maintainer>`.”
```

- Set website: https://opentermsarchive.org
- Add the following tags: `terms-of-service`, `terms-of-service-agreements`, `terms-and-conditions`, `open-terms-archive`.
- Uncheck “Releases”, “Packages” and “Environments”.

#### Define repository settings

These settings ease the whole contribution process.

- In the `Pull Requests` section: check only the “Allow squash merging” option, and set it to “Default to pull request title and commit details”.
- Enable “Allow auto-merge”.
- Enable “Automatically delete head branches”.
- In the `Branches` section: add a branch protection rule for `main`, check “Require status checks to pass before merging” and add `validate_modified_declarations` and `validate_schema` as required status checks.
- In the `Actions` section, in the `General` submenu: select "Allow all actions and reusable workflows".

#### Update readme

> - Update readme with proper metadata: topic, maintainers, jurisdictions, languages…

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Update the readme file with proper metadata: topic, maintainers, jurisdictions, languages…
```

These settings aim at minimising the otherwise overwhelming amount of information and click targets.

- Features: uncheck “Wikis” and “Projects”.
- In the `Actions` section, in the `General` submenu: select "Disable actions".

### Versions

Create the snapshot repository by using the [Demo versions](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-versions) as template:
- Go to the [demo versions repository homepage](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-versions)
- Click on the "Use this template" dropdown
- Select "Create a new repository"
- In the opened page, fill the repository name, it is strongly recommended to use the `<collection_id>-versions`.
- When redirected to the newly generated repositroy, please wait until the automatic setup is done (it should be done in less than a minute).
- Give write rights on the repo to the maintenance team.

#### Fill the about section

- Set the description: “Documents versions for `<collection_name>`. Maintained by `<maintainer>`.”
- Set website: https://docs.opentermsarchive.org/navigate-history/
- Add the following tags: `terms-of-service`, `terms-of-service-agreements`, `terms-and-conditions`, `open-terms-archive`.

> - Uncheck “Packages” and “Environments”.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [] Uncheck “Packages” and “Environments”.
```

I wonder if it wouldn't be better to have checkboxes, which would make it easier to use this list as a list of things done / not yet done. What do you think ?

Reviewer: I would like to have a checklist too, but since this is a documentation page, I don't see how this checklist would be actionable.

#### Define repository settings

These settings aim at minimising the otherwise overwhelming amount of information and click targets.

- Features: uncheck “Wikis” and “Projects”.
- In the `Actions` section, in the `General` submenu: select "Disable actions".

> ## Set up the GitHub maintenance team

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Set up GitHub maintenance teams
```

For collections to be included in the Open Terms Archive organisation only. For third parties, handle rights however you see fit.

> - [Create a new team](https://github.com/orgs/OpenTermsArchive/new-team)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Create a new collection team](https://github.com/orgs/OpenTermsArchive/new-team)
```

- Add selected members to the team
- Add the declarations repository to the collection team, with “Maintain” access rights
- Add the snapshots repository to the collection team, with “Triage” access rights (giving them more would enable them to corrupt data)
- Add the versions repository to the collection team, with “Triage” access rights (giving them more would enable them to corrupt data)
- Add the declarations, snapshots and versions repositories to the Bots team with “Write” access

- - -

## Setup deployment

### On the server

- Connect to the server with `ssh <username>@<host>` (example usernames: `debian`, `ubuntu`…)
- Create a new SSH key: `ssh-keygen -q -N "" -f ~/.ssh/ota-deploy`
- Add public key to authorized_keys `cat ~/.ssh/ota-deploy.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys`
	- Display the public key `cat ~/.ssh/ota-deploy.pub` and keep it temporarily for the next steps
- Add private key to the SSH authentication agent `ssh-add ~/.ssh/ota-deploy` (start the ssh agent before if necessary `eval \`ssh-agent -s\``)
	- Display the private key `cat ~/.ssh/ota-deploy` and keep it temporarily for the next steps

Note: user must have the right to `sudo`.

> ### On GitHub declarations repository settings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### On GitHub definitions repository settings
```
It's really strange to have 2 different words for the same thing, we really need to correct this everywhere!

Reviewer: I agree, and at this stage I believe it is safer to stick to “declarations”.

Create the following [secrets](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets#creating-encrypted-secrets-for-a-repository):

- `SERVER_FINGERPRINT`: obtained with `ssh-keyscan -t ed25519 <host>`
- `SERVER_SSH_KEY`: use the previously generated server private key

> ### On declarations repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### On definitions repository
```

---
title: "Creating a collection"
weight: 2
---

# Creating a collection

## Define the necessary metadata

> First of all, it is strongly recommended to define the scope and metadata of the collection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, define the scope and metadata of the collection:
```

- Concise description of the collection topic (examples: `Largest global social media`, `Most used social media in France`, `Dating apps`, `Platforms providing services to businesses`…)
- Collection name (3 words maximum, examples: `Platform Governance Archive`, `France Élections`, `Dating`, `P2B Compliance Assessment`…)
- Collection ID (examples: `pga`, `France-elections`, `dating`, `p2b-compliance`…)

> - Terms language (examples: `English`, `French`, `English`, `All EU languages`…)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Terms language (examples: `English`, `French`, `All EU languages`…)
```

> - Service jurisdiction (examples: `EU`, `France`, `EEA`, `EU`…)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Terms jurisdiction (examples: `EU`, `France`, `EEA`, `USA`, `global`…)
```

- Collection maintainer entity (name, logo, url)

## Create repositories

> ### Collection definition

Reviewer: At this stage, we are still using the term “declarations” throughout the documentation, I believe it is better to be consistent and make a mass change when / if we decide to replace “declarations” by “definitions”.

```suggestion
### Declarations
```

Create the collection definition repository by using the [Demo collection](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-declarations) as template:
- Go to the [demo collection repository homepage](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-declarations)
- Click on the "Use this template" dropdown and select "Create a new repository"

> - In the new "Create a new repository" page that opens up,  fill the field `Repository name` by using the collection `ID` followed by `-declarations`. For example: `demo-declarations`

Reviewer: We can't use as example the previous value.

```suggestion
- In the new "Create a new repository" page that opens up,  fill the field “Repository name” by using the collection ID followed by `-declarations`. For example: `pga-declarations`.
```

> - When redirected to the newly generated repository, please wait until the automatic setup is done (it should be done in less than a minute). You can check the status of the `first-time-setup` GitHub action to find out if everything went smoothly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When redirected to the newly generated repository, wait a minute or two for the automatic setup to run. You can check the status of the `first-time-setup` GitHub action to make sure that everything ran fine.
```

#### Fill the about section

- Click on the little cogwheel icon next to the "About" block.

- Set the description: “Declarations for `<collection_name>`. Maintained by `<maintainer>`.”
- Set website: https://opentermsarchive.org
- Add the following tags: `terms-of-service`, `terms-of-service-agreements`, `terms-and-conditions`, `open-terms-archive`.
- Uncheck “Releases”, “Packages” and “Environments”.

#### Define repository settings

These settings ease the whole contribution process.

- In the `Pull Requests` section: check only the “Allow squash merging” option, and set it to “Default to pull request title and commit details”.
- Enable “Allow auto-merge”.
- Enable “Automatically delete head branches”.
- In the `Branches` section: add a branch protection rule for `main`, check “Require status checks to pass before merging” and add `validate_modified_declarations` and `validate_schema` as required status checks.
- In the `Actions` section, in the `General` submenu: select "Allow all actions and reusable workflows".

#### Update readme

> - Update the readme file with proper metadata: topic, maintainers, jurisdictions, languages…

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update the README file with proper metadata: topic, maintainers, jurisdictions, languages…
```

#### Update deployment inventory

> - Open the `deployment/inventory.yml` and set server information: ip, user, fingerprint…

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Open the `deployment/inventory.yml` and set the server information: server IP, username, server fingerprint…
```

### Snapshots

> Create the snapshot repository by using the [Demo snapshots](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-snapshots) as template:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the snapshots repository by using the [`demo-snapshots` repository](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-snapshots) as template:
```

> - Go to the [demo snapshots repository homepage](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-snapshots)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Go to the [`demo-snapshots` repository](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-snapshots)
```

- Click on the "Use this template" dropdown
- Select "Create a new repository"

> - In the opened page, fill the repository name, it is strongly recommended to use the `<collection_id>-snapshots`.

Reviewer: It is more than recommended: if the user does not follow this naming pattern, the automated replacements will fail.

```suggestion
- Set the repository name to `<collection_id>-snapshots`.
```

> - When redirected to the newly generated repositroy, please wait until the automatic setup is done (it should be done in less than a minute).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When redirected to the newly generated repository, wait a minute or two for the automatic setup to run. You can check the status of the `first-time-setup` GitHub action to make sure that everything ran fine.
```

- Give write rights on the repo to the maintenance team.

> #### Fill the about section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Fill the “About” section
```

- Set the description: “Documents snapshots for `<collection_name>`. Maintained by `<maintainer>`.”
- Set website: https://opentermsarchive.org
- Add the following tags: `terms-of-service`, `terms-of-service-agreements`, `terms-and-conditions`, `open-terms-archive`.
- Uncheck “Releases”, “Packages” and “Environments”.

#### Define repository settings

These settings aim at minimising the otherwise overwhelming amount of information and click targets.

> - Features: uncheck “Wikis” and “Projects”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Features: uncheck “Wikis”, “Issues”, “Discussions” and “Projects”.
```

- In the `Actions` section, in the `General` submenu: select "Disable actions".

### Versions

> Create the snapshot repository by using the [Demo versions](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-versions) as template:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the versions repository by using the [`demo-versions` repository](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-versions) as template:
```

> - Go to the [demo versions repository homepage](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-versions)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Go to the [`demo-versions` repository](https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/demo-versions)
```

- Click on the "Use this template" dropdown
- Select "Create a new repository"

> - In the opened page, fill the repository name, it is strongly recommended to use the `<collection_id>-versions`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set the repository name to `<collection_id>-versions`.
```

> - When redirected to the newly generated repositroy, please wait until the automatic setup is done (it should be done in less than a minute).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When redirected to the newly generated repository, wait a minute or two for the automatic setup to run. You can check the status of the `first-time-setup` GitHub action to make sure that everything ran fine.
```

- Give write rights on the repo to the maintenance team.

> #### Fill the about section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Fill the “About” section
```

- Set the description: “Documents versions for `<collection_name>`. Maintained by `<maintainer>`.”
- Set website: https://docs.opentermsarchive.org/navigate-history/
- Add the following tags: `terms-of-service`, `terms-of-service-agreements`, `terms-and-conditions`, `open-terms-archive`.
- Uncheck “Packages” and “Environments”.

#### Define repository settings

These settings aim at minimising the otherwise overwhelming amount of information and click targets.

> - Features: uncheck “Wikis” and “Projects”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Features: uncheck “Wikis”, “Issues”, “Discussions” and “Projects”.
```

- In the `Actions` section, in the `General` submenu: select "Disable actions".

## Set up GitHub maintenance teams

For collections to be included in the Open Terms Archive organisation only. For third parties, handle rights however you see fit.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<details>

```

(with closing tag at the end of the list of course)

Author: Do not work on our website (raw html omitted)

- [Create a new collection team](https://github.com/orgs/OpenTermsArchive/new-team)
- Give it the name of the collection
- Set as avatar the collection icon from the website
- Set as description: “Maintainers of the <collection_name> collection”
- Add selected members to the team
- Add the declarations repository to the collection team, with “Maintain” access rights
- Add the snapshots repository to the collection team, with “Triage” access rights (giving them more would enable them to corrupt data)
- Add the versions repository to the collection team, with “Triage” access rights (giving them more would enable them to corrupt data)
- Add the declarations, snapshots and versions repositories to the Bots team with “Write” access

- - -

## Setup deployment

### On the server

- Connect to the server with `ssh <username>@<host>` (example usernames: `debian`, `ubuntu`…)
- Create a new SSH key: `ssh-keygen -q -N "" -f ~/.ssh/ota-deploy`

> - Add public key to authorized_keys `cat ~/.ssh/ota-deploy.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the public key to `authorized_keys`: `cat ~/.ssh/ota-deploy.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys`
```

> 	- Display the public key `cat ~/.ssh/ota-deploy.pub` and keep it temporarily for the next steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- Copy the public key with `cat ~/.ssh/ota-deploy.pub` and keep it temporarily for the next steps
```

> - Add private key to the SSH authentication agent `ssh-add ~/.ssh/ota-deploy` (start the ssh agent before if necessary `eval \`ssh-agent -s\``)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the private key to the SSH authentication agent: `ssh-add ~/.ssh/ota-deploy` (start the SSH agent before if necessary with `eval \`ssh-agent -s\``)
```

> 	- Display the private key `cat ~/.ssh/ota-deploy` and keep it temporarily for the next steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- Copy the private key with `cat ~/.ssh/ota-deploy` and keep it temporarily for the next steps
```

Note: user must have the right to `sudo`.

### On GitHub declarations repository settings

Create the following [secrets](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets#creating-encrypted-secrets-for-a-repository):

- `SERVER_FINGERPRINT`: obtained with `ssh-keyscan -t ed25519 <host>`
- `SERVER_SSH_KEY`: use the previously generated server private key

### On declarations repository

Fill `deployment/inventory.yml`:

- `<host>` (example: `162.19.74.224`)
- `ansible_user: <username>` (example: `debian`)
- `ed25519_fingerprint: <server_ssh_fingerprint>` (example: `AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIJkjE1KIbUcoClK+iKLR5ZvmdXMD/eXWghHdenFeJz4c` obtained with `ssh-keyscan -t ed25519 <host>`)

- - -

## Test

### Via GitHub Actions

- Check that the `deploy` action ran properly on the declarations repository.

### Locally

> _To test deployment from your local machine, your SSH keys must be authorized to connect to the server._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test deployment from your local machine, your SSH keys must be authorized to connect to the server.
```
